# Writing a Parser and AST for custom GPU kernel Domain Specific Language
This is a tutorial on how to write a custom parser using the taocpp/PEGTL library and how to build custom nodes that PEGTL can use to generate an abstract syntax tree (AST). The motivation behind this tutorial and its contents is part of my independent study in building a compiler that compiles custom programs to PTX -*Parallel Thread Execution (PTX) is Nvidia's low-level virtual machine and ISA acting as a stable IR for CUDA*-. 

In my previous tutorial (~/grafting-custom-gpu-binaries/00-tutorial.md) I grafted custom GPU sections into a fatbin file and executed fatbins with the Nvidia Driver API. This tutorial builds the compiler with the contents of the first tutorial in mind, with the ultimate goal of executing custom fatbin files generated by the compiler. 

An additional motivation for this tutorial is to help myself remember the design choices of the AST, and the specific C++ syntax that makes the AST possible (hint: it has everything to do with OOP). 

All files I will be referring to and pasting code snippets of will be in the ```~/toy-gpu-compiler-frontend/``` directory. 

## Understanding taocpp/PEGTL and Building the PEG Rule Structs
I decided to build my parser using a parsing expression grammar (PEG) library. A parse expression grammar is a way to define a parser, and it describes a formal language in terms of a set of rules for recognizing strings in the language. The strength of PEGs is that they are deterministic and unambigous by design, using ordered choice (/). This differs from traditional parsers which have unordered choice (|) at the grammar level, and thus has no inherent priority. PEGs are best for smaller grammars and domain-specific languages (DSL). If interested in learning about parse expression grammars further, read the Wikipedia page on the topic.   

Before implementing the language and parse expression grammar, I wrote out my starter language using the Backus-Naur form (BNF). This helped me reason about the simplest iteration of my language. Although the syntax of the language changed as I developed the parser, starting out with writing the BNF definitely made my life easier. 

Since I want to be able to optimize the IR of my language, I chose to create custom AST nodes with a base class ```Expression```. I figured that it would be easier to run analysis and make optimizations if I knew exactly how the AST (first intermediate representation) worked. Also, I knew it would be a fun aspect of my study and I would learn a lot about object-oriented programming. 

Now, onto the PEGTL...I enjoyed building with PEGTL and learned quite a bit about template meta-programming in the process. ```~/parser.hpp``` holds most of the code for the parser. Going through how the parse expression grammar is built: Within the grammar namespace, a ```struct``` is constructed for each rule.
```
struct number 
		: pegtl::seq<
			ws,
			pegtl::opt<pegtl::one<'+','-'>>,
			pegtl::plus<pegtl::digit>,
			ws
		> {};
```
This is the struct for the ```number``` rule. It matches to a part of the program where one or more ```pegtl::digit```, with an optional sign, are sandwiched in optional whitespace. This is done through template inheritance, where each rule struct inherits from a taocpp/PEGTL combinator template. The rest of the rules are implemented in a similar syntax. For now, I have 
```number, variable, term, arith_op, assign_op, vector, expr, assign_expr, and program``` rules.

## Creating ```my_ast_node``` and Custom Selectors
The trickest part of building the frontend of the compiler so far has been creating the ```my_ast_node``` custom ast node and selectors that correspond to each relevant rule in my grammar. First, the custom node: A custom node class must implement a specific interface. Since I chose to have my ```my_ast_node``` inherit from ```pegtl::parse_tree::node```, the only content I needed to add to my class was the ```std::unique_ptr<Expression> ast;```, which held the AST node corresponding to the PEG rule (note: ```Expression``` is part of the AST and will be explained in a later section). 

When using the PEGTL library, nodes are always owned and handled by a ```std::unique_ptr``` (Ex: ```std::unique_ptr<my_ast_node>& node```) and are never copied or assigned. This is because unique pointers implement the smart pointer concept and manages a dynamically allocated object through exclusive ownership. Unlike ```std::shared_ptr```, only one ```std::unique_ptr``` can own a resource at a given time. Unique pointer prohibits copies, but PEGTL custom nodes also prohibit moves. This is because all nodes are handled by a ```std::unique_ptr```. A non-pointer node should not be able to copy or move. 

Therefore, the contents of ```my_ast_node```, inheriting from ```pegtl::parse_tree::node```, is: 
```
std::unique_ptr<Expression> ast; // ast holds the Expression nodes (my custom AST representation)

// default constructors
my_ast_node() = default;
my_ast_node(const my_ast_node&) = delete; // copy constructor
my_ast_node& operator=(const my_ast_node&) = delete; // copy assignment operator
my_ast_node(my_ast_node&&) = delete; // move constructor
my_ast_node& operator=(my_ast_node&&) = delete; // move assignment operator
```

Now, onto the default and custom selector class templates. The templated selector class for each rule determines whether a parse tree node is generated. This is useful because some nodes don't contain content and shouldn't be a part of the parse tree. The ```pegtl::parse_tree::store_content::on<>``` method, predefined by the library, stores the node, including pointing to the content it matched on. Initally, ```store_content``` contained all rules in my grammar. The syntax for the default selector looks for my grammar like so: 
```
template< typename Rule >
struct selector :
	pegtl::parse_tree::selector< 
		Rule, 
		pegtl::parse_tree::store_content::on<
			grammar::arith_op,
			/*
			Don't need to include these rules in the base selector; they have custom selectors (template specializations)
				grammar::arith_expr,
				grammar::expr,
				grammar::number,
				grammar::term,
				grammar::program,
				grammar::assign_expr,
				grammar::vector
			*/
			grammar::variable,
			grammar::assign_op
		>
> {}; 
```
The rules that are commented out have a specialization for the selector template. This allows for a unique selecting process, meaning that the compiler writer can specify where and how the parsed content is stored. As an example, here is the template specialization for the ```grammar::number``` selector: 
```
template<>
struct selector< grammar::number> : std::true_type {
	template< typename... States>
	static void transform(std::unique_ptr<my_ast_node>& node, States&&...) {
		std::cout << "\n--- NUMBER TRANSFORM ---" << std::endl;

		if (!node->has_content()) {
			std::cout << "has_content: 0" << std::endl;
			return;
		} 

		std::string content = node->string();
        std::cout << "content: '" << content << "'" << std::endl; // cout for debug

		// assigning ast the Integer object with value		
		int value = std::stoi(node->string()); 
		node->ast = std::make_unique<Integer>(value); 
	}
};
```

Each specialization of the selector class template has the option to have a ```transform()``` static member function. I included this function for every specialization in my parser. ```transform()``` can modify the node argument in any way. In this situation, the string representation of the node is extracted and used to create an instance of a ```Integer``` object (Integer is a derived class of Expression. This will be explained in the AST section). Additionally, I included checks and ```std::cout``` to print debug as the parser is running. 

Take a look at the code, in the ```~/parser.hpp``` file for the other selector class template specializations.

## Custom AST Nodes with Inheritance in C++

Moving on to the construction of the custom AST nodes. As stated before, the ```Expression``` class is the base class of the AST, and all other node classes are directly derived from this class. Ignoring the class methods and variables required for the three address code (TAC) and codegen, the base class is comprised of: 
```
virtual std::unique_ptr<Expression> eval() const = 0;
virtual std::string print_expr(int indent = 0) const = 0;
virtual bool isInteger() const { return false; }
```
```eval()``` and ```print_expr``` both have no implementation in the base class; each derived class overrides the base class definition of the variable. ```eval()``` is the method called when the goal is to interpret the language (with an "Interpreter"). The C++ compiler (in this case ```clang```) evalutes the expression. The way the whole program is evaluated with ```eval()``` is the magic of polymorphic recursion: virtual methods that call themselves on children. The ```print_expr``` method also uses polymorphic recursion, but this method pretty-prints the AST to the console. 

```isInteger()``` has an implementation, ```return false;``` because ```Expression``` is not an ```Integer```. Only the ```Integer``` derived class overrides this method implementation to return ```true```;

You may have noticed the base class has no constructor. That is ok, because each derived class has its own constructor, taking specific parameters depending on the type of the AST node. 

For example, the constructor for ```class ArithmeticExpression : public Expression``` takes three parameters: 
1. ```std::unique_ptr<Expression> left```
2. ```std::unique_ptr<Expression> right;```
3. ```char op;```
The three parameters map to the left side of an arithmetic expression, the right side of an arithmetic expression, and the arithmetic operator (Ex: 1 + 1). Using the a member initializer list, the constructor initializes class members before the constructor body executes. This is more efficient than assignment inside the constructor body because there is no rewriting of values.

Continuing with the contents of ```ArithmeticExpression```, it has the required override of the ```eval()``` method. Speaking vaguely, the method 
1. Evalutes the ```left``` and ```right``` sub-expressions
2. Typechecks that each sub-expression is an ```Integer``` (Integers are the only types in the language so far)
3. If both ```right``` and ```left``` are not ```nullptr```, a new ```std::unique_ptr``` is constructed with the values of each sub-expression and returned.

An important part of the polymorphic implementation is the use of ```std::dynamic_cast``` in the line 
```
Integer* rval_int = dynamic_cast<Integer*>(rval.get());
```
This line converts a raw pointer of a base class ```Expression``` to a raw pointer of the derived class ```Integer```. If the ```rval_int``` is not ```nullptr```, it means the cast was successful and the ```Expression``` was actually an ```Integer```. 

Take a look at the code, in the ```~/parser.hpp``` file, for the other AST Node definitions and implementations.

## Conclusion
This tutorial explained how the parser and AST for this DSL and compiler-to-PTX is constructed. The implementation for the parser, using taocpp/PEGTL parse expression grammar library, heavily utilizes template meta-programming. My AST node implementation relies heavily on inheritance, polymorphism, and recursion. 

At the time of writing this tutorial, I am developing the middle-end (IR and optimized IR) as well as backend (codegen, instruction selection/scheduling, register allocation). 





























